[WEBSITE-497] Add documentation to run Jenkins on Java 11 (#2097)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/administration/requirements/upgrade-java-guidelines.adoc

---
layout: documentation
title: Upgrading Jenkins Java version from 8 to 11
---

In order to upgrade the JVM used to run Jenkins, more specifically from Java 8 to Java 11, there are a few details and steps to take care.

First, we need to understand that some plugins were not directly compatible with Java 11. 
So if those plugins are installed in our instance, we need to make sure they are installed with those versions or more recent ones.

> == Workflow Support 3.0 

Reviewer: I believe this explanation must be removed actually. 

Given finally the plugin was able to upgrade to Java 11 compatibility, but staying on Java 8, I think it ought to be only discussed in the `workflow-support` changelog.

As this is something likely many, if not most, users will have already done already, independently from Java 11 bump, this might be more misleading here than anything else I think.

---

I think there's two others things:
* remind that agents **must** be running also on Java 11 if the master is upgraded (point to versioncolumn plugin?)
* a new the detached `jaxb` plugin will be installed automatically on Java 11 runtime.

Reviewer: Oh, and backup backup backup :)

Author: > As this is something likely many, if not most, users will have already done already

I'd prefer not relying on something un-told. In the end, the upgrade is required anyway and should have been done already.

---

Noted the two other points, I'll add them.

Reviewer: As discussed off-the-band, you have a point. What I am saying is that anyway, we should be prescriptive, and basically say like "please first upgrade every single plugins you have before considering a JVM upgrade, especially make sure that `workflow-support` is 3.0+.".

This way: if there's an plugins upgrade issue while still on Java 8, then users will not be inclined to mix it with a JVM upgrade issue. 
This will be easier for them to fix if so, and we'll get less/no misleading reports about failed Java 11 upgrades. Win win.

---
layout: documentation
title: Upgrading Jenkins Java version from 8 to 11
---

> In order to upgrade the JVM used to run Jenkins, more specifically from Java 8 to Java 11, there are few details and steps to take care.

Reviewer 2: ...there are a few details....

Author: ```suggestion
In order to upgrade the JVM used to run Jenkins, more specifically from Java 8 to Java 11, there are a few details and steps to take care.
```

First, we need to understand that some plugins were not directly compatible with Java 11. 

> This means that the community had to fix those plugins and release them.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> So, we need to make sure that, if those plugins are installed in our instance, we need to make sure they are installed with those versions or more recent ones.

Reviewer 2: I would recommend removing the second phrase and just making this sentence "So if those plugins are installed in our instance, we need to make sure they are installed with those versions or more recent ones."

> 

Author: too many empty lines, will be removed with next typo fix, I just won't do a commit only for this.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: ```suggestion
```

== Workflow Support 3.0 

> One of the most important upgrade is about the plugin:workflow-support[Workflow Support plugin].

Reviewer 2: One of the most important upgrades is the plugin:workflow-support[Workflow Support plugin].

Author: ```suggestion
One of the most important upgrades is the plugin:workflow-support[Workflow Support plugin].
```

---
layout: documentation
title: Upgrading Jenkins Java version from 8 to 11
---

In order to upgrade the JVM used to run Jenkins, more specifically from Java 8 to Java 11, there are a few details and steps to take care.

== Backup

As for any upgrade, we recommend you to backup the `JENKINS_HOME`.
It is also recommended to test the upgrade with the backup before performing it on the production instance.

> == Plugins upgrade

Reviewer 2: Upgrading Plugins

Author: ```suggestion
== Upgrading Plugins
```

> First, we need to understand that some plugins were not directly compatible with Java 11.

Author: ```suggestion
Some plugins were not previously compatible with Java 11.
```

> So, it is important you upgrade all the plugins to the latest version available at the time you are performing the upgrade.

Reviewer 2: How about "Some plugins were not previously compatible with Java 11.  Therefore it is important that you upgrade all of your plugins..."  or maybe even "Many plugins were not previously compatible with Java 11".

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore it is important that you upgrade all of your plugins.
```

One of the most important upgrades is the plugin:workflow-support[Workflow Support plugin].
We need to make sure that the version of the plugin is at least `3.0`.
Because this upgrade changes the serialization of the Pipeline builds, it requires that no Pipeline jobs are running when upgrading this plugin. 

Even if Pipeline jobs are supposed to survive a Jenkins restart, when the restart of the instance is due to a Pipeline related plugin, it is always a better option to make sure that no Pipeline builds are in progress before restarting the instance.

== JAXB libraries

Some plugins were using JAXB libraries, provided by the JDK running Jenkins.
Those libraries are no longer provided, since Java 9.

In order to fix this, we bundled those libraries in a new detached plugin: plugin:jaxb[JAXB plugin].
This new plugin will be automatically installed with Jenkins core more recent than `2.163`.

== JVM version on agents

It is important to know that because of the communication system between the master and its agents, all agents must be running on the same JVM version as the master.

> This means, as we are about to run Jenkins on Java 11, we need to make sure the agents JVM are upgraded as well.

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we mention something about agents launched via JWS?

Author: good point.

Even if Pipeline jobs are supposed to survive a Jenkins restart, when the restart of the instance is due to a Pipeline related plugin, it is always a better option to make sure that no Pipeline builds are in progress before restarting the instance.

== JAXB libraries

Some plugins were using JAXB libraries, provided by the JDK running Jenkins.
Those libraries are no longer provided, since Java 9.

In order to fix this, we bundled those libraries in a new detached plugin: plugin:jaxb[JAXB plugin].
This new plugin will be automatically installed with Jenkins core more recent than `2.163`.

== JVM version on agents

It is important to know that because of the communication system between the master and its agents, all agents must be running on the same JVM version as the master.
This means, as we are about to run Jenkins on Java 11, we need to make sure the agents JVM are upgraded as well.

In order to validate the version of each agent, you can rely on plugin:versioncolumn[Versions Node Monitors] plugin.
This plugin will provide a new information on the node management screen of our Jenkins instance.

> This will permit us to visualize which JVM version each agent is using.

Reviewer: + one can configure this plugin to preventively automatically disconnect agents on incorrect JVMs versions.

It is also very important to note that, since Java 9, Java Web Start is deprecated. 

> This means that it is  not possible to start an agent with the JWS anymore.

Reviewer: NIT: double space after `it is`

At this moment, there is no plan to replace this. 

> We do encourage you to move to a SSH connection or to use containers instead.

Reviewer: `a SSH` => `an SSH`

---
layout: documentation
title: Upgrading Jenkins Java version from 8 to 11
---

In order to upgrade the JVM used to run Jenkins, more specifically from Java 8 to Java 11, there are a few details and steps to take care.

== Backup

As for any upgrade, we recommend you to backup the `JENKINS_HOME`.
It is also recommended to test the upgrade with the backup before performing it on the production instance.

> == Upgrading Plugins

Reviewer 4: There is no section about updating Jenkins masters and Java themselves. E.g. do you recommend to update from 2.107.x/Java8 to 2.164/Java11 straight away? Or do you recommend to update Jenkins first or then Java? How to upgrade Java after all? How to do eerything in Docker and so on?

Author: That's actually an excellent point: I haven't thought of that. Will do.

Some plugins were not previously compatible with Java 11.

> Therefore it is important that you upgrade all of your plugins.

Author: The link is already  [here](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/pull/2097/files#diff-900e0ddae1a2909d8ad36db5ef693bebR50). Do you still want to duplicate it here?

> Therefore it is important that you upgrade all of your plugins.

Reviewer 4: Yes, and it would be great to massage the guidelines so that we do not force a blind full upgrade

One of the most important upgrades is the plugin:workflow-support[Workflow Support plugin].
We need to make sure that the version of the plugin is at least `3.0`.
Because this upgrade changes the serialization of the Pipeline builds, it requires that no Pipeline jobs are running when upgrading this plugin. 

> Even if Pipeline jobs are supposed to survive a Jenkins restart, when the restart of the instance is due to a Pipeline related plugin, it is always a better option to make sure that no Pipeline builds are in progress before restarting the instance.

Reviewer: * _Pipeline related plugin_ => I think adding update after this would make this clearer

Author: ```suggestion
Even if Pipeline jobs are supposed to survive a Jenkins restart, when the restart of the instance is due to a Pipeline related plugin upgrade, it is always a better option to make sure that no Pipeline builds are in progress before restarting the instance.
```

> == JAXB libraries

Reviewer 4: Stylistic comment. It might make sense to clarify what is "JAXB". Not all Java developers are familiar with this acronym

```suggestion
== Javax XML Bind libraries
```

> Some plugins were using JAXB libraries, provided by the JDK running Jenkins.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Some plugins are using JAXB libraries, provided by the JDK running Jenkins.
```

There are still some plugins around. You might want to add a link to the cleanup EPIC by @batmat

> Those libraries are no longer provided, since Java 9.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`java.xml.bind` and `javax.activation` modules are no longer included into OpenJDK 11, and plugins might fail if there is no replacement offered
```

Minor factual mistake. JAXB was removed only in Java 11, and only in OpenJDK/OracleJDK. Other distributions may still include it. The rest

In order to fix this, we bundled those libraries in a new detached plugin: plugin:jaxb[JAXB plugin].

> This new plugin will be automatically installed with Jenkins core more recent than `2.163`.

Reviewer: _when running on Java 11_, I _guess_ this is OKish given this page is overall about 8 to 11.

Author: ```suggestion
This new plugin will be automatically installed with Jenkins core more recent than `2.163` when running on Java 11.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you manage your plugins outside Jenkins (e.g. `plugins.txt` in Docker images), you might need to explicitly install the plugin.

```

== JVM version on agents

It is important to know that because of the communication system between the master and its agents, all agents must be running on the same JVM version as the master.
This means, as we are about to run Jenkins on Java 11, we need to make sure the agents JVM are upgraded as well.

In order to validate the version of each agent, you can rely on plugin:versioncolumn[Versions Node Monitors] plugin.
This plugin will provide a new information on the node management screen of our Jenkins instance.
This will permit us to visualize which JVM version each agent is using.
The plugin can also be configured to disconnect automatically any agents which would have incorrect JVMs versions.

> It is also very important to note that, since Java 9, Java Web Start is deprecated. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is also very important to note that Java Web Start was removed from Java 11. 
```

> This means that it is not possible to start an agent with the JWS anymore.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This means that it is not possible to start an agent using a `*.jnlp` file anymore.
```

> At this moment, there is no plan to replace this. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a Jenkins master runs with Java 11, it will no longer offer the Java Web Start button in the Web UI.
At this moment, there is no plan to replace this. 
```

> We do encourage you to move to an SSH connection or to use containers instead.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We do encourage you to move to connect agents using CLI, plugins like plugin:ssh-slaves[SSH Slaves Plugin], or to use containers instead.
```

== JDK Tool Automatic installer

Since Java 11, the Oracle licensing prevent the Jenkins community to list JDK distributed by this company.

> Because of this, it is not possible, at this moment to have an automatic installation of a JDK in version 11.

Reviewer 4: Add link to the ticket ?

Author: ```suggestion
Because of this, it is not possible, at this moment to have an automatic installation of a JDK in version 11.
This problem is tracked with the ticket link:https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/browse/JENKINS-54305[JENKINS-54305].
```

> We do encourage you to use containers based on images containing all the tooling you need for your build.

Reviewer 4: Add a section about the Maven plugin below?

Author: I think the maven situation should have its own page, because it's not related to Java 11 but to any Java version: you have to tweak the build as soon as you need to Maven plugin to build a project for an older JVM than the one used to run Jenkins.
